On the conditions of Experience and Knowledge: An Investigation of Frank Jackson’s Epiphenomenalism and the Problem of Knowledge

At the centre of the physicalist movement is the belief in a single-substance ontology. Across its various iterations of reductive and non-reductive versions remains the core tenet that at the most fundamental level of reality, physical matter is the only thing that can truly be said to exist. From this ontology we derive the physicalist epistemology centred around “physical information”. Physical information, as described by Frank Jackson, consists of the facts about all the perceptible qualities and measurable quantities of physical substances (Jackson, 1982). It is all the information in the world that can be directly obtained through reason and the practice of the empirical sciences. Jackson claims that the physicalist, who acknowledges only one fundamental physical substance, must hold that access to the collected total of all physical information in the world must sufficiently entail the contents of all information in the world. This formulation of physicalism is commonly referred to as a-priori physicalism, and its propositional statement can be constructed as follows:

If a-priori physicalism is true, then all fundamental information is physical
If all fundamental information is physical then information of any other kind must be sufficiently derivable from physical facts
Therefore, knowing all physical facts should entail the knowledge of everything that can be known

However, Jackson, along with his fellow “qualia freaks”, believe this proposition and its conclusion to be false. He argues that there exists a category of information pertaining to the experience of reality that cannot be sufficiently derived from knowing all physical facts. To demonstrate this “knowledge argument”, Jackson presents to us two thought experiments. First, he has us imagine Fred, a man born with some genetic anomaly that allows him to see a clear distinction between two otherwise indistinguishable shades of red. Second, he has us imagine Mary, a neuroscientist who has learned all the physical information pertaining to the colour red, but who has never actually seen the colour for herself. In the first example, we are meant to believe that Fred knows something that the average person cannot, and in the second, that there is a gap in Mary’s knowledge that the average person has filled. In either case, he argues that the extra or missing knowledge can only be gained through personal experience. Jackson calls this knowledge “qualia”, and it is the category of subjective information representing one’s knowledge of “what x is like”. As a counter to his presentation of a-priori physicalism, Jackson’s knowledge argument can be propositionally constructed as such:

If a-priori physicalism is true, then all fundamental information is physical
If all fundamental information is physical then information of any other kind must be sufficiently derivable from physical facts
It is possible to know all physical facts yet remain ignorant to certain facts of experience
Therefore, there exists information that cannot be derived from knowledge of all physical facts
Therefore, a-priori physicalism isn’t true

Suppose we accept the conclusion of the knowledge argument. Congratulations, Jackson, physicalism has been defeated. But now we’re left with the task of finding an ontology that would be able to reconcile the apparent physical nature of the world along with the existence of qualia. To this, Jackson offers us epiphenomenalism. As a dualist position, epiphenomenalism recognizes mental states as distinctly separate from physical states. However, unlike traditional substance dualism, epiphenomenalism is a property dualist position, treating the mind as a contingent property of the physical brain rather than a separate substance. Furthermore, the position doesn’t grant causal power to mental events, insisting instead on a “by-product” relation between the mind and the body. Jackson’s reason for going with a property conception of the mind wasn’t explicitly stated, but it’s likely that it was done simply in favour of adhering to empirical principles as much as he could, and given that he saw no necessary reason to grant the mind the capacity of causal influence, he decided not to. This decision however, leads to some problems that we will further discuss later in this response.
For now, we will move on to examine the three arguments Jackson conceived of to be likely candidates for the most common points of contention against epiphenomenalism and his attempts at resolving them. The first describes the unintuitiveness of the argument, for it seems obvious that we do sometimes act in response to our mental states. To this, Jackson makes reference to Hume’s problem of induction, claiming that a causal relation between events A and B (or, in this case, the mind and the body) cannot be sufficiently validated. The second is an appeal to Darwin’s theory of evolution: why would we have developed causally-inefficacious qualia considering it would’ve been useless to our survival? To this, Jackon points out the principle of non-design nested within Darwin’s theory. While the broader extent of our abilities are adapted from our survival needs, the finer details in our biological limits were not designed purposefully, thus resulting in the random imperfections found across all forms of life (such as our propensity for developing causally-inefficacious qualia). The third and final argument points to our ability to recognize other minds, a process that involves our predictions and expectations of other peoples’ behaviours to be caused mentally in a way similar to our own. Here, Jackson invites us to consider the possibility of the mind as an overdetermined system as he again calls into question the rigidity of causal relations, this time placing the blame on the possible existence of unknown third variables.
Deciding that these concerns had been adequately tackled, Jackson then admits that there seems to be no strong argument in favour of believing in epiphenomenalism itself. He remarks that this is a result of our eager adoption of the physicalist framework, within which we’ve deluded ourselves into forming an “overly optimistic view of our powers” (Jackson, 1982). He describes this optimism as our expectant desire to fully understand and make sense of both ourselves and the world as formed by the same parts of a universal fabric. This, he argues, is impossible, for we are not abstract engines of pure reason, but products of evolutionary biology. We are limited by our brain’s capacity for memory and cognition as well as its dependency on sensation (an attribute which itself contains certain limitations) in the formation of both our ontological and epistemic maps. In light of this observation, Jackson recommends that we adopt a more “pessimistic view” in its stead. Despite the fact that he doesn’t explicitly describe what this “pessimistic view” is, we can assume with pretty high confidence that he’s referring to his idea of epiphenomenalism.  
There are two reasons I can think of which were the likely drivers for Jackson to label this view as “pessimistic”. The first relates to his attribution of causal inefficacy to qualia. To conceive of the mind as having no ability to interact causally with our physical bodies is to suggest a world devoid of what most consider to be free will. Similar in case to most supervenient physicalist theories, physical determinism would be the guiding force of an epiphenomenal ontology. The second relates to its apparent lower requirement in the conception of “our powers”, as there is no condition of epiphenomenalism that assumes the entirety of the world’s knowledge can be conceived of or known. The latter case is the most important of the two, as it grants Jackson’s epiphenomenalism an edge over the “optimistic” physicalist perspective. However, unfortunately for Jackson, this edge is a manufactured one, a result of his misrepresentation of physicalism due to a conflation of its ontological essence and the limitations of an anthropocentric epistemology.

In his diagnosis of the physicalists’ optimism, Jackson failed to consider that the limits in our ability to grasp knowledge of experience could be viewed simply as an epistemic limitation of our brains and not a reflection of a fundamental, ontological distinction. This phenomenon is called the epistemic or explanatory gap. It refers to the gap between our understanding of physical truths and truths of experience. The gap has plagued western philosophy for centuries, with its earliest form that I can recall being Socrates’ veil of perception. While there have been attempts at bridging the gap through internalist philosophies of subjective priority, most epistemic frameworks that maintain belief in an external world simply acknowledge it as an irreconcilable divide. Before I continue I should preface my upcoming paragraphs by confessing (or assuring) that my goal will not be to propose some grand solution to this millenia-old problem, but instead to offer an alternative, contemporary perspective on our understanding of epistemology in a way that may better align it with our desire to achieve a unified ontology.
Beyond the theoretical situations of thought experiments, we already recognize the existence of minds different than our own, such as those in insects and animals. These minds, despite arising from brains that share a similar biological function as ours, are unable to reason to the extent that we can, or even to conceive of the kind of knowledge that we are able to grasp. Of course, this is likely due to the fact that biological evolution never required higher cognitive function to develop amongst most nonhuman beings, as many of them have additional communication and functional abilities that we lack to make up for it (such as pheromonal transmission and processing, which is really cool, by the way). But none of this takes away from the mere fact that there exists lesser minds than our own, minds that are limited in their epistemic capacity by the simple fact of their different biological conditions. In fact, beyond example cases of creatures much different from ourselves, the brains of even our own ancestors were likely inferior to the ones we house today (for I daresay that no palaeolithic man could possibly understand the humour of ‘among us’, no matter the conditions of his social development and upbringing). All of this is to say that it remains entirely possible and very much conceivable that there exists knowledge beyond that which we can currently grasp.
But how can we be sure that within this category of “currently ungraspable knowledge” lies information that may bridge the epistemic gap? To help answer this question I will introduce the idea of inorganic minds. Artificial or machine intelligence (AI) is a relatively new concept that has recently seen a rapid acceleration in the growth of its complexity, power and scale. As AI continues to expand into the domains of everyday knowledge, we as human beings are witnessing a coalescence of many aspects of what we once considered to be non-wholly physical aspects of our lives being mastered and evolved by neural networks--digital (reductively physical) constructions of intentional design. From basic pattern recognition to natural language processing, the advancement of AI challenges our traditional understandings of what it means for information to be a priori or a posteriori. We’ve been accustomed to the formulation of epistemic realisations as being either derived from reason (a priori) or by experience (a posteriori). For a long time, all a-priori truths were considered equal to necessary truths and vice versa, for if something could be known independent of experience, how could it have come to be if it were anything but true? Then came Saul Kripke, who in 1970 gave his seminal lecture Naming and Necessity where he outlined the conditions for a-posteriori necessary truths--facts of equivalence that can be known only through experience. Now, consider the knowledge of a machine. When an AI is trained on a set of data, what kind of epistemic relation is being forged here? Is it a-priori, in that the training of a neural network is a process akin to the process of cognitive reasoning, or is it a-posteriori, in that the data being fed is akin to experience? To the mind of a machine, what does experience even mean?
Suppose we were to construct an artificial neural network with the power to completely imitate the brain capacity of a child. The only physical difference in the configuration of the brains is that one is biological (the child) and the other, synthetic. Right from the get go, there are some key differences separating the two, as the child requires air, warmth, and nutrients to survive, while the machine needs only running electricity. Assume, however, that the experiences of the child are mimicked through simulation in the mind of the machine as the brain signals of the child’s neural activity are copied and mapped onto the nodes of the neural network. Have we by this process sufficiently created a machine capable of experience? It is likely that most people would say no, that we’ve merely created a duplicate non-simpliciter of an actual feeling thing. That by virtue of its unnatural occurrence, the machine cannot be considered a true subject of experience. So what then is the condition of experience? Apart from the informational content generated by experience itself, it appears that we have a further requirement for the recognition of experience, a condition of authenticity. But the true nature of this condition of ours doesn’t end at authenticity. No, it’s really an appeal to consciousness.
In 1980, John Searle devised a thought experiment known as the Chinese Room argument. In it, a man (who does not know Chinese) is placed in an empty room save for a mail slot on the door to allow for the entry and exit of slips of paper (Cole, 2020). The man is then given a set of rules that guides him in the manipulation of certain characters and symbols, and he does so by responding to the letters delivered to him through the mail slot with the rule-informed characters of his own. No matter the complexity of the rules nor increases in efficiency or speed of response, the man, in generating responses that continue to abide by the rules provided to him, will never be said to truly understand Chinese.
The man in the room represents the mind of a machine, a pure, cognitive device capable of nothing beyond the rules we designed it within. The Chinese language, in this case, would be consciousness. It is the gap between man and machine, it is our gift of freedom, our gift of choice. It grants us the ability to feel and the ability to imagine. Poetic nonsense aside, what really is consciousness? According to most contemporary ontologies, whether you are a physicalist or a property dualist, consciousness is an emergent property of mental states, themselves derived from the physical processes of the brain. It is difficult to pinpoint an exact reason why consciousness could not be present in a sufficiently designed machine. If anything, it is likely a psychological response of fear that is preventing us from being able to recognize it in non-human entities. Alas, if we refuse to decouple our notions of experience and a-posteriori knowledge from our anthropocentric concept of consciousness, then we are left with a challenge of creating a new, machine-adapted epistemology, one in which we either see a parallel of a the a-priori and a-posteriori knowledge categories (and in which case, it would be quite redundant), or a conversely, a new epistemology that unites its’ accessible forms of knowledge into a single representational category. Now how would something like that work? To help answer this, we can turn to contemporary philosopher of mind, David Chalmers.
In his paper Consciousness and its Place in Nature (2006), Chalmers offers six unique ontologies that each provide a slightly different answer to the problem of consciousness. The fifth entry, Type-E Dualism, is Jackson’s epiphenomenalism. Unsurprisingly, the entry for it presents it as “inelegant and counterintuitive”. Just below it, however, is a curiously nebulous entry for a Type-F Monism that professes a relation to Bertrand Russell’s neutral monism. Type-F Monism, as described by Chalmers, maintains that there is a singular fundamental substance of a physical kind from which all phenomenal states arise naturally within. This view supposes not only that all mental and physical attributes of being are cut from the same fundamental fabric of reality, but that the phenomenal case of experience and consciousness we so specially assign to man is in fact a state of nature that permeates all of physical reality. If an inclusive machine epistemology were to exist and prosper, it would certainly benefit from being one of a Type-F Monist position.

We began our rebuttal to Jackson with the belief that the world in both its physical and apparently non-physical forms could be fully captured as information, independent of experience. To resolve this speculative position I offered a framework of machine intelligence in which there exists a real, current potential for parity between the ontological and epistemic world. Unlike our minds, simple (yet complex) products of survival--freed and shackled by its’ own liberating yet demanding faculty of experience--the machine mind, the artificial intelligence, these technologies represent the possibility of attaining a transcendental framework of philosophical understanding, where the epistemic gap has been filled for all who dare to cross.